2026-05-27

Calibration: consider the first omicron peak.

Fit the waste-water peak.
Find some data source that gives the peak rate
of infection in Canada.
Use this to convert waste water peak value to
number of people infected in each jurisdiction.

=> this is very approximate, but should allow me
to work with absolute numbers of people, which are
what matter to extinction

FIRST: find fraction of people infected at peak of
the first omicron wave.

NEJM: https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMc2202879
See supplementary data file ()
And: "When we applied the between-phase incidence 
among vaccinated or unvaccinated participants to the 
29.7 million adults in Canada, we found that an 
estimated 9.0 million adults (95% CI, 7.9 to 10.2 million) 
had been newly infected during the omicron BA.1/1.1 
wave, including 0.9 million infections (95% CI, 0.6 to 1.2 
million) among 2.3 million unvaccinated adults"

So best estimate of total area under omicron curve is
0.303 times the population of the jurisdiction.

This is enough to calibrate with once I have a fit to
the omicron peak for each case.

NEXT: fit to omicron peak for each case and get the
relationship between waste water copy number and
case number. [DONE]

2026-05-28

city_ratios.dat gives the ratio of infected people to
waste-water peak area for the first omicron peak.

This is adequate to normalize a model to absolute
case numbers, which is what I need to estimate the
effect of reducing spread.

2026-05-30

Successfully fit all cities of interest. Next is to start
on modelling, either via SEIR or MC. First objective 
is to fit the most recent peak, then to predict the
effect of various interventions with regard to 
transmission probability based on clean air and/or
masking of a fraction of the population.

One conclusion from the analysis so far is that the
AREA of the waves is not decreasing in general. The
2024 wave was in most cases as big or bigger than
the 2023 and 2025 waves.

Also: there is some actual seasonality in these data!

Three years isn't really enough to say, but there does
appear to be a lull in the spring and a peak in the late
fall. This is quite different from the early years of the
ongoing pandemic.

2026-06-01

Expanded cases to cover provinces and the whole country.

One possible pattern is that the higher the previous wave,
the lower (in area) the current wave, suggesting some
persistent immuity among the population. With only three
waves to work with it's a little early to draw any strong
conclusion, though.

NOTE the unit of data is "copies/ml", so areas 
are days*copies/ml

Plausibly there is a summer wave followed by a winter
wave, with a minor peak around September 1 and a
major peak in the first few months of the year. It really
is too soon to say, and my goal here is NOT to model
the yearly curve with the greatest accuracy but to show
how an approximate model of the pandemic responds
to a particular intervention: masking or otherwise reduced
spread in the LULLs as opposed to at the PEAKs. That is,
intervening when cases are low, like an engineer, not
when cases are high, like a physician or MPH.

SO: the next step is to see if I can model all three waves
with a SEIRS model or MC across jurisdictions with
similar model parameters, ideally independent of the
size of the place. I'm interested in the smaller cities as
places that might experience extinction events, especially
in the spring.

"The Effect of Early vs Late Intervention on Pandemic Curves"

2026-06-02

Start on SEIRS model for individual peaks

2026-06-04

Epidemiology is such a mess. There is no attempt to
sanity-check anything epidemiologists say. For example,
there is the paper cited above that says omicron wave 1
infected about 1/3 of Canadians. This, coupled with my
waste-water analysis that says recent peaks have been
of the same area as omicron1, suggests that 1/3 of all
Canadians get infected every year. This implies via the
Poisson distribution that around 13% of Canadians have
NOT have covid, and that *I* have the average number
of infections, which is 2. This is implausible. Even I'm not
that unlucky. Furthermore, it has recently been suggested
that over 98% of people have had covid, often without
symptoms. But this implies that the average number of
infections is 4, via p(mean=4, 0) ~ 0.018 for the
Poisson distribution.

SO: the total number of covid cases in the omicron1
wave was much higher than 30%. There is no other
way to work this out. This is also what I'm seeing in
terms of fits, which don't work unless the total number
is higher than expected.

Which means there are no fixed points in all this,
because epidemiology is not a science and 
epidemiologists are not scientists. They don't run
any kind of empirical or theoretical sanity check on
their work.

By the summer of 2022 (2.5 years in) 54% of Canadians
had anti-bodies, which implies a true infection rate of
over 60%. THAT implies a 40% infection rate per year,
as p(mean=1, 0) = 0.36 and 1/2.5 = 0.4.

So the numbers are all over the place.

4/6 = 0.67 infections per year.

SO: how do I use this to recalibrate things?

What I can say so far is that the last three year peaks
are comparable in area to omicron1. But I don't know
how many people were in omicron1.